.\" Freeciv - Copyright (C) 1996 - A Kjeldberg, L Gregersen, P Unold
.\"   This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\"   it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
.\"   the Free Software Foundation; either version 2, or (at your option)
.\"   any later version.
.\"
.\"   This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\"   but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\"   MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\"   GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.TH FREECIV 6 "April 19th 2009"
.SH NAME
civclient \- The client for the Freeciv game
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B civclient \
[ \-a|\-\-autoconnect ] \
[ \-d|\-\-debug \fIlevel_number\fP ] \
[ \-h|\-\-help ] \
[ \-l|\-\-log \fIfilename\fP ] \
[ \-M|\-\-Meta \fIURL\fP ] \
[ \-n|\-\-name \fIstring\fP ] \
[ \-p|\-\-port \fIport\fP ] \
[ \-P|\-\-Plugin \fIstring\fP ] \
[ \-r|\-\-read \fIfilename\fP ] \
[ \-s|\-\-server \fIaddress\fP ] \
[ \-S|\-\-Sound \fIfilename\fP ] \
[ \-t|\-\-tiles \fIstring\fP ] \
[ \-v|\-\-version ]

IPv6 aware clients have additional parameter:
.B [ \-A|\-\-announce \fIprotocol\fP ]

.SH DESCRIPTION
Freeciv is a free turn-based multiplayer strategy game, in which each player
becomes the leader of a civilization, fighting to obtain the ultimate goal:
To become the greatest civilization.

Players of Civilization II\*R by Microprose\*R should feel at home, since one
aim of Freeciv is to have compatible rules.

Freeciv is maintained by an international team of coders and enthusiasts, and is
easily one of the most fun and addictive network games out there!

This is the client program used to connect to a Freeciv server - See also
.IR civserver (6)

This manual page only lists the command line arguments. For details
regarding the options when using
.B civclient
see the Client Manual which can be found at
.UR
http://www.freeciv.org/
.UE
as well as the documentation which is part of the Freeciv distribution.
.SH OPTIONS
.I civclient
accepts all of the standard X Toolkit command line options along with the
additional options listed below. Those may not be combined; that is,
"civclient \-np caesar 5557" will not work, instead you would need to enter
"civclient \-n caesar \-p 5557". All options have a short form (single
hyphen and single letter) and a long form (double hyphen and a complete word);
their effects are identical.
.TP
.BI "\-A, \-\-announce \fIprotocol\fP"
Uses \fIprotocol\fP when searching game from LAN.
Possible values for \fIprotocol\fP are:

\fBIPv4\fP

\fBIPv6\fP

\fBnone\fP
.TP
.BI "\-a, \-\-autoconnect"
Skips the connect dialog, automatically inserting the default values. This is
quite convenient when all has been set up properly.
.TP
.BI "\-d \fIlevel_number\fP, \-\-debug \fIlevel_number\fP"
Sets the amount of debugging information to be logged in the file named by the
.I \-l
option. Acceptable values for the \fIlevel_number\fP are:

\fB0\fP    for fatal messages only.

\fB1\fP    for fatal and error messages.

\fB2\fP    for fatal, error and normal messages.

\fB3\fP    for fatal, error, normal, and verbose messages.

.TP
.BI "\-h, \-\-help"
Prints a short summary of the command line options.
.TP
.BI "\-l \fIfilename\fP, \-\-log \fIfilename\fP"
Defines a log file, \fIfilename\fP, to be produced during processing. Use the
.I \-d
option to set how much is logged.  By default, fatal and normal messages are 
printed to standard output.  With a log file, such messages go to the log
instead.
.TP
.BI "\-M \fIURL\fP, \-\-Meta \fIURL\fP"
Specifies the \fIURL\fP of the metaserver to connect to. A metaserver is a
place where Freeciv servers can publish their presence. Freeciv clients consult
the metaserver to offer users a selection of games to join. By default the 
standard Freeciv metaserver is used. 
.TP
.BI "\-n \fIstring\fP, \-\-name \fIstring\fP"
Specifies the name (\fIstring\fP) to play under. This option is critical when 
reconnecting to a game. Please note that you might need to quote your playername.
.TP
.BI "\-p \fIport\fP, \-\-port \fIport\fP"
Specifies the server \fIport\fP to connect to. By default this is 5556, if in 
doubt ask the server administrator.
.TP
.BI "\-P \fIstring\fP, \-\-Plugin \fIstring\fP"
Specifies the plugin to use for sound output.  Available options  for 
\fIstring\fP are:

\fBnone\fP

\fBsdl\fP

.TP
.BI "\-r \fIfilename\fP, \-\-read \fIfilename\fP"
Specifies a file, \fIfilename\fP, of server commands which the server will 
automatically read and process, as if you had typed them in at the server's 
prompt. (for spawned server only)
.TP
.BI "\-s \fIaddress\fP, \-\-server \fIaddress\fP"
Specifies the game server \fIaddress\fP to connect to. This server might easily
run on the same machine as the client.
.TP
.BI "\-S \fIfilename\fP, \-\-Sound \fIfilename\fP"
Specifies the \fIfilename\fP to read the sound tags from.
.TP
.BI "\-t \fIstring\fP, \-\-tiles \fIstring\fP"
Specifies the tiles to be used within the game by supplying the name 
(\fIstring\fP) of the tilespec. See the \fIFILES\fP section below for tilespecs
included with this distribution.
.TP
.BI "\-v, \-\-version"
Prints the version number and exits.
.SH "EXAMPLES"
.TP
.B civclient \-\-name "King Richard" \-\-server io.daimi.aau.dk
Starts the client using the name \fIKing Richard\fP and connecting to the
server at \fIio.daimi.aau.dk\fP.
.TP
.B civclient \-a \-t trident
Starts the client with the \fItrident\fP tiles and autoconnects to the 
\fIlocalhost\fP.
.SH FILES
.TP
.BI ~/.civclientrc
This is where your local settings will be stored.
.TP
.BI tilespecs
The Freeciv client requires several files in the Freeciv data directory,
which is
.I /usr/local/share/freeciv
by default. Currently the following tilespecs can be used:

\(bu
.I amplio.tilespec

\(bu
.I hex2t.tilespec

\(bu
.I isophex.tilespec

\(bu
.I isotrident.tilespec

\(bu
.I trident.tilespec
.SH ENVIRONMENT
The Freeciv client accepts these environment variables:
.TP
.BI FREECIV_CAPS
A string containing a list of "capabilities" provided by the server. The
compiled-in default should be correct for most purposes, but if you are familiar
with the capability facility in the source you may use it to enforce some
constraints between clients and server.
.TP
.BI FREECIV_COMPRESSION_LEVEL
Sets the compression level for network traffic.
.TP
.BI FREECIV_DATA_ENCODING
Sets the data encoding (used for data files, savegames, and network strings).
.TP
.BI FREECIV_INTERNAL_ENCODING
Sets the internal encoding (used for GUI strings).
.TP
.BI FREECIV_LOCAL_ENCODING
Sets the local encoding (used for terminal output).
.TP 
.BI FREECIV_MULTICAST_GROUP
Sets the multicast group (for the LAN tab).
.TP
.BI FREECIV_PATH
A colon separated list of directories pointing to the
.B freeciv
data directory. By default freeciv looks in the following directories, in order,
for any data files: the current directory; the "data" subdirectory of the
current directory; the subdirectory ".freeciv" in the user's home directory; and
the directory where the files are placed by running "make install".
.TP
.BI HOME
Specifies the user's home directory.
.TP
.BI http_proxy
Set this variable accordingly when using a proxy.
.TP
\fBLANG\fP  or  \fBLANGUAGE\fP
Sets the language and locale on some platforms.
.TP
\fBLC_ALL\fP  or  \fBLC_CTYPE\fP
Similar to LANG (see documentation for your system).
.TP
.BI USER
Specifies the username of the current user.
.SH BUGS
Please report bugs to
.UR
http://bugs.freeciv.org/
.UE
\.

.SH "MORE INFO"
The Freeciv homepage is located at
.UR
http://www.freeciv.org/
.UE
\.

Updates and new info is first posted there.
.SH AUTHORS
The Freeciv Team <freeciv-dev AT freeciv.org>.

This manpage was originally put together by Florian Ernst 
<florian_ernst AT gmx.net> using the Client Manual and the comments in the 
sourcecode. It was updated by Ben Bettin <bwbettin AT gmail.com> to add new
features, integrate information from the website's online documentation, and 
for slight formatting adjustments. Feel free to use it as you wish.

.SH "SEE ALSO"
.IR civserver (6)
and the Client Manual at the Freeciv homepage.
